---
title: "GBrowse Configuration/I18n"
---
# GBrowse Configuration/I18n

This article describes **internationalization** in GBrowse.

*For the main GBrowse configuration article, see:
<a href="../GBrowse_Configuration" class="mw-redirect"
title="GBrowse Configuration">GBrowse Configuration</a>.*

# Internationalization

See: **GBrowse Configuration/I18n**.

GBrowse is partially internationalized. End-users whose browsers are set
to request a non-English language will see the GBrowse main and
secondary screens in their preferred language, provided that GBrowse has
the appropriate translation file.

Translation files are located in gbrowse.conf/languages/ and use the
standard two-letter language abbreviations, such as "fr" for French, as
well as the regional abbregiations, such as fr-CA for Canadian French.
Currently there are translation files for French, Italian, and Japanese.
If your favorite language isn't supported, you are encouraged to create
a new translation file and contribute it to the GBrowse development
effort. Please contact Lincoln Stein (lstein@cshl.org) for help in doing
this.

If the end user does not specify a preferred language, GBrowse will
default to "en" (English). You can change this by placing a "language"
option in the configuration file somewhere inside the \[GENERAL\]
section. For example, to make Japanese the default, create this entry:

     language = ja

GBrowse will still use the end-user's preferred language in preference
to the default if the preferred language is available.

Although GBrowse automatically changes the text and button language, it
can't automatically translate the track labels. If you would like the
track labels to localize, you will have to provide your own translations
in the "key", "citation" and "category" options. The syntax is similar
to that used for semantic zooming:

     [gene]
     glyph   = transcript
     feature = transcript:curated
     height  = 10
     key     = Named Gene
     key:fr  = GËnes NommÈs
     key:it  = I Geni dati un nome a
     key:sp  = Los Genes denominados
     category = Genes
     category:fr = GËnes

The option is followed by a colon and the two-letter language name to
indicate that when the page is being displayed with this language, to
use the indicated value of the option. The option without the colon is
the default. You may enter accented and umlauted characters directly, as
shown, or use the HTML entities. Non-English character sets, such as
Japanese, should also work correctly, provided that the translation file
indicates the correct character set to use.

HELP FILES

The GBrowse help files are in English. Although there is support for
internationalizing the hep files, no one has done this yet. If you are
industrious and wish to translate the help files into your favorite
language, find the two help files where they are located in
htdocs/gbrowse/. One is named general_help.html, while the other is
named annotation_help.html. Translate them, and create new files with
the language prefix appended to the end. For example, the French
translation of annotation_help.html would be annotation_help.html.fr.

LIMITATIONS

- There is no localization support. For example, GBrowse will print
  large numbers using commas (e.g. 1,234,567) instead of periods, even
  when talking to a European browser.
- Although the HTML frame around the GBrowse genome image will use the
  appropriate character set, the overview and detail images themselves
  are limited to Latin alphabets. This is because of limited native
  character support in the GD library used by GBrowse. When a non-Latin
  character set is called for, such as Japanese, GBrowse will use
  Japanese for the frame, but English for the image.
- The rate at which the GBrowse team adds new features to the browser
  often outstrips the ability of volunteers to update the translation
  files. This means that new buttons and fields may be displayed in
  English on an otherwise correctly internationalized page.
