



<span id="top"></span>




# <span dir="auto">Talk:GMOD Evo Hackathon Proposal</span>










## Contents



- [<span class="tocnumber">1</span>
  <span class="toctext">Meetings</span>](#Meetings)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1</span> <span class="toctext">2010/02/12
    Conference Call, February 12, 2010 2pm
    EST</span>](#2010.2F02.2F12_Conference_Call.2C_February_12.2C_2010_2pm_EST)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.1</span>
      <span class="toctext">Agenda</span>](#Agenda)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.2</span>
      <span class="toctext">Attendance</span>](#Attendance)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.3</span>
      <span class="toctext">Sheldon -
      introduction</span>](#Sheldon_-_introduction)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.4</span>
      <span class="toctext">Hilmar - mechanics of putting together a
      proposal</span>](#Hilmar_-_mechanics_of_putting_together_a_proposal)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.5</span>
      <span class="toctext">Discussion</span>](#Discussion)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.6</span>
      <span class="toctext">Personal
      Wishlists</span>](#Personal_Wishlists)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.1.7</span> <span class="toctext">Action
      Items</span>](#Action_Items)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">1.2</span>
    <span class="toctext">2010/02/22, Second conference call, 5PM
    EST</span>](#2010.2F02.2F22.2C_Second_conference_call.2C_5PM_EST)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.2.1</span>
      <span class="toctext">Agenda</span>](#Agenda_2)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.2.2</span>
      <span class="toctext">Attendance</span>](#Attendance_2)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.2.3</span>
      <span class="toctext">Proposal ideas</span>](#Proposal_ideas)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">1.3</span> <span class="toctext">2010/03/17
    Third conference call, 2PM
    EST</span>](#2010.2F03.2F17_Third_conference_call.2C_2PM_EST)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.3.1</span>
      <span class="toctext">Agenda</span>](#Agenda_3)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.3.2</span>
      <span class="toctext">Attendance</span>](#Attendance_3)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.3.3</span>
      <span class="toctext">Discussion</span>](#Discussion_2)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">1.4</span> <span class="toctext">2010/05/05
    conference call, 5PM
    EST</span>](#2010.2F05.2F05_conference_call.2C_5PM_EST)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.4.1</span>
      <span class="toctext">Attendance</span>](#Attendance_4)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.4.2</span> <span class="toctext">Last
      Meeting's Action Items</span>](#Last_Meeting.27s_Action_Items)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.4.3</span>
      <span class="toctext">Discussion</span>](#Discussion_3)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">1.4.4</span> <span class="toctext">Action
      Items</span>](#Action_Items_2)



# <span id="Meetings" class="mw-headline">Meetings</span>

We had several meetings while creating the proposal. The agendas and/or
minutes for some of those meetings are here.

## <span id="2010.2F02.2F12_Conference_Call.2C_February_12.2C_2010_2pm_EST" class="mw-headline">2010/02/12 Conference Call, February 12, 2010 2pm EST</span>

The minutes taken by
[User%3ARobertBuels](User%3ARobertBuels "User%3ARobertBuels"), any
inaccuracies or omissions are his.

### <span id="Agenda" class="mw-headline">Agenda</span>

Purpose of the hackathon

The hackathon was proposed to bring more support for evolutionary
biology into the GMOD toolkit. We should thinks of what current needs
are not being addresses or adequately addressed and take care to keep
the focus on this topic. Some ideas I have are:

1.  Better support for comparative genomics (mainly MSA but also other
    types) data and data visualization. For example, bringing
    GBrowse_syn up to the same standard as GBrowse, improving support
    for the data processing and loading, useing an ontology such as the
    multiple alignment ontology for critical meta-data not captured
    bycurrent MSA formats.
2.  Others...

[mckays](User%3AMckays "User%3AMckays") 14:55, 12 February 2010 (UTC)

- focus in on one or at most two implementation goals for the hackathon
- identify which type of person we need to invite
- start to develop a list of critical people to have there
- develop some action items and assign them to people
  - drafting the proposal?
  - securing the venue?
    - NESCent has blocked out the second week of June or the last two
      weeks of July for us [mckays](User%3AMckays "User%3AMckays") 14:55, 12
      February 2010 (UTC)
      - June timeframe overlaps with Arthropod Genomics (at this time,
        only Carson Holt is going from GMOD); nothing overlaps yet with
        last two weeks of July) - see [Calendar](Calendar "Calendar")
        for what else is going on.

### <span id="Attendance" class="mw-headline">Attendance</span>

- Sheldon McKay
- Hilmar Lapp
- Scott Cain
- Robert Buels
- Nicole Washington (2:25pm EST)

### <span id="Sheldon_-_introduction" class="mw-headline">Sheldon - introduction</span>

The purpose of the hackathon is to add more support for evolutionary
biology in GMOD tools. I think hackathons are great, and GMOD will
benefit from one.

The basic structure is that some number of people make a pitch for a
thing to work on, and hope that people will nucleate around that and
form working groups, and work for 5 days or however long.

  

### <span id="Hilmar_-_mechanics_of_putting_together_a_proposal" class="mw-headline">Hilmar - mechanics of putting together a proposal</span>

It falls into Nescent's whitepaper program, on the Nescent website,
click on 'informatics' and the 'whitepaper program'. It's relatively
informal, you put forward a proposed activity that convinces our
directors to throw money at it. For hackathons, the amount of money is
relatively significant, from \$28-40K, depending on how many
participants. The budget is significant, so you want to work out a
relatively coherent argument as to why the activity itself is needed.
How you expect to conduct it (which is not a big question in this case,
we have done them before), and then what you expect to come out of it.
What are the holes that you expect to be filling with that activity.

The proposal gets reviewed by the governing body of Nescent (currently
called the operations committee, but that name could change soon).

When that is clear, the next step is to invite the key people and make
sure you have those on board for the dates.

It's good to keep in mind that the whole process takes 4-5 months, allow
a couple of weeks for writing the submission, submitting it, etc. Couple
weeks for the invitations to go out and get responses. Couple weeks for
an 'open call' for participants and responses.

Ideally, all the participants and invitations are known 2 months in
advance. It's possible to violate that to some extent, but you don't
want to stretch it too much.

  

### <span id="Discussion" class="mw-headline">Discussion</span>

SM: For dates, I like the second week of June.

SC: I also am invited sometimes to arthropod genomics

HL: FYI, in July the ISMB conference ends on July 14. A significant
fraction of the people would be going to ISMB, we need to be careful of
that. Probably makes the week of July 19 not such a good candidate. The
really oppressive heat here starts in July and ends mid-August, when
it's oppressively hot here.

SM: I really want to try to make June work for the reasons you laid out.
I have some other stuff in early July, then ISMB and the plant biology
meeting.

NW: early June would also work for me.

Group decided to shoot for week of June 7-11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SM: We need to think about the kind of people we want to invite, we need
people that can actually sit down and implement working products at this
session.

HL: I would suggest with drafting the proposal whitepaper, the key
people would probably naturally fall out of that. The first step would
be to start fleshing out some ideas for what good focus areas would be.
Unless you think we need those key people to put us in a position to
flesh those out in the first place.

SM: Whitepapers from previous accepted hackathons, are those available
for us to see?

HL: Yes, there are some linked from their respective home pages. HL
TODO: provide links to the accepted whitepapers

HL: I wouldn't go too overboard with the whitepaper, what is more
critical than exhausting it there is to keep pushing forward within the
time-frame and nailing down key points.

SM: Given our timeline, I'd say we should probably be communicating
offline quite a bit and iterating very fast on the whitepaper. For the
mechanics, I think it would be good to set up a google doc and a google
group mailing list

  

### <span id="Personal_Wishlists" class="mw-headline">Personal Wishlists</span>

SM: I think it would be good if we each stated the personal agendas we
have in participating in this hackathon.

SM: My agenda is improving comparative genomics support for things that
are in the GMOD toolkit. Bringing the synteny browser up to a standard
similar to GBrowse is near and dear to my heart.

RB: My personal agenda is good software engineering. I want to make sure
that things are put together well.

SC: Anything having to do with GMOD, I'm there.

HL: Chado natural diversity module, handling taxonomies well, handling
phylogenies. Subgroup sizes of 4 to 5 in working groups are by far the
best.

  

### <span id="Action_Items" class="mw-headline">Action Items</span>

SM: set up google doc for the whitepaper

SM: set up organizer mailing list for organizing committee, and one for
the participants

SM: send out a Doodle poll for the next conference call

HL/SM: find links to past accepted proposals

## <span id="2010.2F02.2F22.2C_Second_conference_call.2C_5PM_EST" class="mw-headline">2010/02/22, Second conference call, 5PM EST</span>

### <span id="Agenda_2" class="mw-headline">Agenda</span>

Please add/change items.

- Focused on getting the proposal written.
- Discuss prior white papers:
  - <span class="pops"><a
    href="https://www.nescent.org/wg/evoinfo/index.php?title=Database_Interop_Hackathon&amp;oldid=3744"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">Database Interop Hackathon</a></span>
  - <span class="pops"><a href="http://www.evoio.org/wiki/VoCamp1/Proposal"
    class="external text" rel="nofollow">Phyloinformatics VoCamp</a></span>
- Identify key elements of the <span class="pops"><a
  href="http://groups.google.com/group/gmod_evohack/web/gmod-evo-hackathon"
  class="external text" rel="nofollow">GMOD evo hackathon whitepaper</a></span>
- Assign tasks to be completed before next call.

### <span id="Attendance_2" class="mw-headline">Attendance</span>

Sheldon McKay, Hilmar Lapp, Scott Cain, Nicole Washington

### <span id="Proposal_ideas" class="mw-headline">Proposal ideas</span>

- we can craft the participants with ideas of topics, but the reciprocal
  is true. up to participants to decide. organizers are also
  participants.

<!-- -->

- scott - proposal is more of the "these are the things we 'might' do",
  rather than exactly what we do. its an overarching guide.

<!-- -->

- hilmar - trying to decide what to accomplish, and gather desires; but
  what is actually accomplished, is executed by participants. the final
  thing is usually close to what is produced; the white paper set the
  tone.

<!-- -->

- don't need really polished white paper. but a good outline. this could
  probably be done quickly.

<!-- -->

- scott - need two pronged approach: write white paper & identify
  topics/people, do this in parallel.

<!-- -->

- scott - we can do the white paper in the next couple of weeks, and
  then start letting people know.

<!-- -->

- come up with skeleton of proposal, and then dole out parts.
  sheldon/hilmar work on first draft. and then rest comment on during
  the rest of the week. hilmar wants to put it on the wiki, so long as
  people's names aren't mentioned. could do google doc if privacy is
  needed. decision, this will be moved to wiki. will use old wish list
  as jumping off point.

Action item - Sheldon to create new wiki page

Action item - Sheldon/Hilmar to write skeleton of proposal.

Action item - Sheldon/Hilmar to solicit input from Scott/Nicole/Robert

- dates recommended are second week of June (7-11)

<!-- -->

- size ~20 persons. not more than 30.
- may seek some extra funding for additional participants.

<!-- -->

- will this be open call or invite only? would be good for open call for
  people to apply...

<!-- -->

- next call in two weeks.

## <span id="2010.2F03.2F17_Third_conference_call.2C_2PM_EST" class="mw-headline">2010/03/17 Third conference call, 2PM EST</span>

### <span id="Agenda_3" class="mw-headline">Agenda</span>

Please add/change items.

- Focused on getting the proposal written.
  - clarify metadata issues
- Dole out responsibilities

### <span id="Attendance_3" class="mw-headline">Attendance</span>

- NLWashington
- ScottCain
- RobertBuels

### <span id="Discussion_2" class="mw-headline">Discussion</span>

- We are running out of time, we need to get this proposal submitted.
- We should get Dave Clements to look at the proposal. TODO: Rob will
  get him to do so.
- Let's set a goal of getting the proposal submitted by the end of next
  week (Mar. 26)
- Scott volunteers to chair next week's meeting.
- Specific editing action items
  - Nicole: add more about alignment metadata
  - Dave Clements: check on natural diversity module and its relation to
    evolutionary phenotype data
  - Hilmar: general edits
  - Rob: general edits

  

## <span id="2010.2F05.2F05_conference_call.2C_5PM_EST" class="mw-headline">2010/05/05 conference call, 5PM EST</span>

### <span id="Attendance_4" class="mw-headline">Attendance</span>

- Dave Clements
- Nicole Washington
- Rob Buels
- Hilmar Lapp

### <span id="Last_Meeting.27s_Action_Items" class="mw-headline">[Last Meeting's](#2010.2F03.2F17_Third_conference_call.2C_2PM_EST) Action Items</span>

- Nicole: add more about alignment metadata
- Dave Clements: check on natural diversity module and its relation to
  evolutionary phenotype data
  - Still don't know, but see [phenotype comparison
    table](Chado_Genetic_Module#Table:_phenotype_comparison "Chado Genetic Module")
- Hilmar: general edits
- Rob: general edits

### <span id="Discussion_3" class="mw-headline">Discussion</span>

Discussed possible inclusion of *atlas-based interfaces* for phenotype,
expression, and fate map *data. This came out of a recent NESCent
working group. This would be attractive to support evo-devo work.*

Have *Motivation* section be overview. Details will be in the *Specific
Objectives* sections. NESCent doesn't actually care about structure. The
document should just get its point across clearly, both to NESCent
reviewers, and to the GMOD community.

Issues that affect everyone and are not specific to evolutionary biology
should not be in the proposal. If such are issues are needed by all/most
evolutionary biologists, then they will emerge at the hackathon. Dropped
schema evolution objective.

Need to specify budget and some recommended requirements. Budget largely
driven by number of participants, and that is largely driven by the
number of specific objectives being proposed. We should get good faith
*intent to participate* commitments from anyone who we think is vital to
have at the event.

Should we investigate integration between phylogeny, organism, and
natural diversity module? If so, we should identify any pain points and
address them.

Visualizing phylogenetic data in GBrowse_syn came up. We decided that
NGS data in GBrowse_syn was of vital interest to the evo community,
based on recent working group at NESCent that Dave and Hilmar
contributed to. Getting GBrowse_syn into the GBrowse 2.0 infrastructure
is a key item. (But I wasn't clear on if this should happen at the
Hackathon, or before it.) We determined that we should not do any work
that rests on top of the GBrowse 1.x platform.

Rob suggested "soliciting gripes" as a good way to identify work items
and then what could be done about them.

### <span id="Action_Items_2" class="mw-headline">Action Items</span>

- Dave will do first pass on initial restructuring of proposal and then
  pass it to Nicole. -- *Done 2010/04/06, but not as polished or full as
  it could have been.*

<!-- -->

- Dave will create Google Docs/Google Groups pages for budget and
  participants lists. -- *Done 2010/04/05.*

<!-- -->

- Nicole will write up details for alignment metadata objective.

<!-- -->

- Nicole and Dave will jointly work on comparative phenotypes in Chado
  objective.

<!-- -->

- Rob will talk to Naama about her experience with the Chado Phylogeny
  module.

<!-- -->

- Dave will contact a key GMOD contributor to find level of interest in
  participating.

<!-- -->

- Dave will writeup details for GBrowse_syn in *Specific Objectives* and
  then send it to Sheldon. -- *Written up, sort of; Need to
  finish/discuss with Sheldon. 2010/04/06*








## Navigation menu



### Namespaces


- <span id="ca-talk"><a href="Talk%3AGMOD_Evo_Hackathon_Proposal" accesskey="t"
  title="Discussion about the content page [t]">Discussion</a></span>


### 

### Variants[](#)








<a href="Main_Page"
style="background-image: url(../images/GMOD-cogs.png);"
title="Visit the main page"></a>


### Navigation



- <span id="n-GMOD-Home">[GMOD Home](Main_Page)</span>
- <span id="n-Software">[Software](GMOD_Components)</span>
- <span id="n-Categories-.2F-Tags">[Categories /
  Tags](Categories)</span>




### Documentation



- <span id="n-Overview">[Overview](Overview)</span>
- <span id="n-FAQs">[FAQs](Category%3AFAQ)</span>
- <span id="n-HOWTOs">[HOWTOs](Category%3AHOWTO)</span>
- <span id="n-Glossary">[Glossary](Glossary)</span>




### Community



- <span id="n-GMOD-News">[GMOD News](GMOD_News)</span>
- <span id="n-Training-.2F-Outreach">[Training /
  Outreach](Training_and_Outreach)</span>
- <span id="n-Support">[Support](Support)</span>
- <span id="n-GMOD-Promotion">[GMOD Promotion](GMOD_Promotion)</span>
- <span id="n-Meetings">[Meetings](Meetings)</span>
- <span id="n-Calendar">[Calendar](Calendar)</span>




### Tools




- <span id="footer-info-lastmod">Last updated at 23:24 on 20 May
  2010.</span>
<!-- - <span id="footer-info-viewcount">6,236 page views.</span> -->
- <span id="footer-info-copyright">Content is available under
  <a href="http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html" class="external"
  rel="nofollow">a GNU Free Documentation License</a> unless otherwise
  noted.</span>

<!-- -->

- <span id="footer-places-about">[About
  GMOD](GMOD%3AAbout "GMOD%3AAbout")</span>

<!-- -->




