---
title: "GBrowse syn Tutorial 2012"
---
# GBrowse syn Tutorial 2012


If you are 2013 GMOD Summer School, you are on the wrong tutorial.  
Use
[GBrowse_syn_Tutorial_2013](GBrowse_syn_Tutorial_2013 "GBrowse syn Tutorial 2013").


  
This tutorial on [GBrowse syn](GBrowse_syn.1 "GBrowse syn") was taught
by [Sheldon McKay](User%253AMckays "User%253AMckays") as part of the [2013 GMOD
Summer School](2013_GMOD_Summer_School "2013 GMOD Summer School").

To follow along with the tutorial, you will need to use **AMI ID:
ami-5bab1c32, name: GMOD 2012 day 4 start**, available in the US East
(N. Virginia) region. See the [GMOD Cloud
Tutorial](GMOD_Cloud_Tutorial "GMOD Cloud Tutorial") for information on
how to get this AMI.

- If you are not using the Amazon EC2 instance, the system paths may
  vary from those described below.

 

[GBrowse_syn](GBrowse_syn.1 "GBrowse syn") is a
[GBrowse](GBrowse.1 "GBrowse")-based
<a href="Synteny" class="mw-redirect" title="Synteny">synteny</a>
browser designed to display multiple genomes, with a central reference
species compared to two or more additional species. It is included with
the standard GBrowse package (version 1.69 and later).


## Further Reading

### A Note on Whole Genome Alignments

The focus of the section of the course is on dealing with alignment or
synteny data and using [GBrowse_syn](GBrowse_syn.1 "GBrowse syn").
However, how to generate whole genome alignments, identify orthologous
regions, etc., are the subject of considerable interest, so some
background reading is listed below:

- <a
  href="http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2006/EECS-2006-104.html"
  class="external text" rel="nofollow">Primer on Hierarchical Genome
  Alignment Strategies</a>
- <a
  href="http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2577869"
  class="external text" rel="nofollow">article on PECAN and ENREDO</a>
- <a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~bjp/pecan/" class="external text"
  rel="nofollow">all about PECAN</a>
- The gene annotations for each species are in [GFF](GFF "GFF") files.
- The alignment data are in a [constrained CLUSTALW
  format](GBrowse_syn_Database#Clustal_alignment_format "GBrowse syn Database")
  (They were not generated by the program CLUSTALW, which is not
  necessarily suitable for whole genome alignments)
- There are processing steps for the alignment data but it is very
  computationally intensive and we will load pre-processed data to get a
  head start.

### Documentation

There is detailed documentation on the GMOD wiki for how to install,
configure and use GBrowse_syn. To get started, browse these pages:

- [GBrowse_syn overview](GBrowse_syn.1 "GBrowse syn")
- [Installation](GBrowse_syn.1#Installation "GBrowse syn")
- [Configuration](GBrowse_syn_Configuration "GBrowse syn Configuration")
- [Alignment Data](GBrowse_syn_Database "GBrowse syn Database")
- [The user interface](GBrowse_syn_Help "GBrowse syn Help")
- [Presentations and
  workshops](GBrowse_syn.1#Presentations_and_Workshops "GBrowse syn")
