---
title: "SOBA Tutorial 2012"
---
# SOBA Tutorial 2012

(Redirected from [SOBA
Tutorial](/wiki/SOBA_Tutorial)

This [SOBA](SOBA.1 "SOBA") tutorial was taught as part of the [2012 GMOD
Summer School](2012_GMOD_Summer_School "2012 GMOD Summer School") and
the [2013 GMOD Summer
School](2013_GMOD_Summer_School "2013 GMOD Summer School").



  SOBA</span>](#About_SOBA)
- [SOBA Web
  Application](#SOBA_Web_Application)
- [SOBAcl](#SOBAcl)
  - [Help](#Help)
  - [Tables](#Tables)
- [Charts](#Charts)
  - [Reports](#Reports)

## About SOBA

**<a href="http://www.sequenceontology.org/cgi-bin/soba.cgi"
class="external text" rel="nofollow">SOBA</a>** is a command line tool
and web application for analyzing [GFF3](GFF3 "GFF3") annotations.
[GFF3](GFF3 "GFF3") is a standard file format for genomic annotation
data. SOBA gathers statistics from GFF3 files and renders them as tables
and graphs.

The web version of SOBA will produce the following:

- Summary statistics of feature types and attributes used
- Histograms of feature lengths
- Graphs of
  <a href="http://www.sequenceontology.org" class="external text"
  rel="nofollow">Sequence Ontology</a> terms used
- Histograms of intron density
- Suggestions to improve SO compliance for invalid terms

In addition, the command line tool (SOBAcl) flexibly produces a much
wider variety of tables, figures and graphs based on the data in a
[GFF3](GFF3 "GFF3") file, as well as the ability to produce complex and
extensible custom reports via a robust template system.

SOBA is a tool for those dealing with genomic sequence annotation who
want to view genome-wide summaries of their annotation files. For
example: SOBA would be a useful tool at an annotation jamboree for a
newly sequenced organism and when preparing the resulting genome paper;
SOBA would help those developing annotation tools to quickly evaluate
updates to their tool; SOBA assists comparative genomics analyses by
providing a high-level overview of the genome of multiple organisms.
SOBA complements genome browsers by providing a summary of all the
features annotated in the genome.

SOBA is built with Perl (and JavaScript for the web interface). The web
interface uses <a href="http://search.cpan.org/perldoc?CGI::Application"
class="external text" rel="nofollow">CGI::Application</a> as a Perl
webapp framework and the JQuery JavaScript library for Web 2.0 effects
and [AJAX](Glossary#AJAX "Glossary"). Both versions of SOBA use the
<a href="http://template-toolkit.org/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">Template Tooklit (TT)</a> to generate html/txt reports,
graphviz for the ontology graphs, and GD for charts. Template Toolkit
makes extensibility very easy, at least for someone who's willing to
learn the fairly simple template language of TT as you don't need to
know Perl or any other programming to use TT.

## SOBA Web Application

Documentation for the web interface to SOBA is available on the <a
href="http://www.sequenceontology.org/wiki/index.php/SOBA_-_Sequence_Ontology_Bioinformatics_Analysis"
class="external text" rel="nofollow">Sequence Ontology Wiki</a> as well
as via tool-tips on the site itself.

Navigate to the
<a href="http://www.sequenceontology.org/cgi-bin/soba.cgi"
class="external text" rel="nofollow">SOBA Web Application</a> with any
modern browser that has JavaScript enabled.

SOBA feature lengths by chromosome

We can constrain the features reported in other ways as well.

``` enter
SOBAcl --columns seqid --rows type --data length --data_type mean \
  --layout table --format text --select 'start => [">=", "1000"], \
  end => ["<=", "1000000"]' hsap_hg18_demo.gff3
```

### Reports

SOBAcl has support for more complex reports.

``` enter
SOBAcl --report attributes --format html_page hsap_hg18_demo.gff3
```

These reports can be generated by custom templates.

``` enter
SOBAcl --columns file   --rows type --data length --data_type mean \
  --layout table --format tab --template soba_custom_template_text.tt \
  hsap_hg18_demo.gff3
```

                 count  length (mean)
    CDS          11944  165.853064300067
    contig           3  229900897.333333
    exon             12918  288.366697631212
    five_prime_UTR   1381   597.052136133237
    gene             1157   67319.117545376
    mRNA             1085   70187.8202764977
    ncRNA            72 24089.3611111111
    three_prime_UTR  1385   569.969675090253

<span class="smwfactboxhead">Facts about
"<span class="swmfactboxheadbrowse"></span>"</span>

|----|----|
| [Has topic](Property%253AHas_topic "Property:Has topic") | [SOBA](SOBA.1 "SOBA") |
