



<span id="top"></span>




# <span dir="auto">GBrowse 2.0 Install HOWTO/Advanced</span>









This article describes **advanced installation topics** for GBrowse 2.0,
such as accelerating GBrowse performance by running it under a
persistent environment, configuring the user login and custom track
upload system, and restricting access to certain databases and tracks
via user authentication.

- For basic GBrowse 2.0 install instructions, see [GBrowse 2.0 Install
  HOWTO](../GBrowse_2.0_Install_HOWTO.1 "GBrowse 2.0 Install HOWTO")
- *For the main GBrowse 2.0 HOWTO article, see: [GBrowse 2.0
  HOWTO](../GBrowse_2.0_HOWTO "GBrowse 2.0 HOWTO").*
- *See also: [GBrowse Install
  HOWTO](../GBrowse_Install_HOWTO "GBrowse Install HOWTO").*

  




## Contents



- [<span class="tocnumber">1</span> <span class="toctext">Running
  GBrowse under FastCGI</span>](#Running_GBrowse_under_FastCGI)
- [<span class="tocnumber">2</span> <span class="toctext">Running
  GBrowse under modperl</span>](#Running_GBrowse_under_modperl)
- [<span class="tocnumber">3</span> <span class="toctext">Configuring
  the User Account
  Database</span>](#Configuring_the_User_Account_Database)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">3.1</span> <span class="toctext">Creating
    and configuring the user account
    database</span>](#Creating_and_configuring_the_user_account_database)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">3.2</span>
    <span class="toctext">Configuring outgoing
    email</span>](#Configuring_outgoing_email)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">3.3</span> <span class="toctext">The Admin
    Interface</span>](#The_Admin_Interface)
    - [<span class="tocnumber">3.3.1</span>
      <span class="toctext">WebGBrowse</span>](#WebGBrowse)
- [<span class="tocnumber">4</span> <span class="toctext">Displaying
  Next Generation Sequencing
  Data</span>](#Displaying_Next_Generation_Sequencing_Data)
- [<span class="tocnumber">5</span> <span class="toctext">Configuring
  the Uploaded Track
  Database</span>](#Configuring_the_Uploaded_Track_Database)
  - [<span class="tocnumber">5.1</span> <span class="toctext">Using the
    DBI::mysql backend</span>](#Using_the_DBI::mysql_backend)
- [<span class="tocnumber">6</span> <span class="toctext">Authentication
  and Authorization</span>](#Authentication_and_Authorization)


## <span id="Running_GBrowse_under_FastCGI" class="mw-headline">Running GBrowse under FastCGI</span>

<a href="http://www.fastcgi.com/drupal/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">FastCGI</a> is a web protocol for generating dynamic that
replaces the usual CGI mechanism. The first time a script is requested,
FastCGI launches that script as a long-running process. Subsequent
requests are forwarded to that process. Because startup time is
eliminated, the responsiveness of a FastCGI script is greatly improved.

GBrowse is FastCGI ready. To take advantage of this facility, you will
need a version of Apache equipped with FastCGI support, and a short
Apache configuration stanza for GBrowse. There are two FastCGI Apache
modules: <a href="http://www.fastcgi.com/dist/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">mod_fastcgi</a> and
<a href="http://httpd.apache.org/mod_fcgid/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">mod_fcgid</a>. In our experience, mod_fastcgi is somewhat
faster than mod_fcgid when working with GBrowse. If you have a binary
distribution, please install the appropriate package:
*libapache2-mod-fastcgi* or *libapache2-mod-fcgid* for APT/Debian
systems, or "mod_fcgid" for RPM systems. You will also need the Perl
FCGI module (*libfcgi-perl* for APT/Debian, *fcgi-perl* for RPM). The
mod_fcgid module has a significant gotcha that you should be aware of if
you use custom Perl library paths. See [Recompiling mod_fcgid to avoid
truncated Perl library
paths](../Recompiling_mod_fcgid_to_avoid_truncated_Perl_library_paths "Recompiling mod fcgid to avoid truncated Perl library paths").

The next step is to create a suitable Apache configuration stanza for
GBrowse, if needed. When you configured and install GBrowse, it probably
created a default configuration for you, and stored it into your Apache
web server's configuration directory (depending on your system,
/etc/apache/conf.d/gbrowse2.conf, /etc/apache2/conf.d/gbrowse2.conf,
/etc/httpd/conf.d/gbrowse2.conf, or similar). If this file is already
installed, then you are all done. Fetch URL
*<a href="http://localhost/fgb2/gbrowse" class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://localhost/fgb2/gbrowse</a>* and compare the
performance to GBrowse running as a CGI script.

If you declined to have the configuration script create this file and
configured GBrowse manually, then you can generate a suitable config
file by running **./Build apache_conf** from within the GBrowse
distribution directory. The FastCGI portion of the configuration file
that is generated will look something like this:


``` de1
 <IfModule mod_fastcgi.c>
   Alias /fgb2 "/usr/lib/cgi-bin/gb2"
   <Location /fgb2>
     SetHandler   fastcgi-script
   </Location>
   FastCgiConfig -initial-env GBROWSE_CONF=/etc/gbrowse2
 </IfModule>
```


Copy this stanza into your main Apache configuration file, or, better,
into the site configuration file directory, /etc/apache/conf.d (or
similar). Restart Apache to pick up the configuration file changes and
fetch the URL
*<a href="http://localhost/fgb2/gbrowse" class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://localhost/fgb2/gbrowse</a>*. You should notice a
marked improvement in load and update speed. The improvement will be
particularly noticeable if you combine FastCGI with a rendering slave,
as described in [Running a GBrowse2 Render
Farm](../Running_a_GBrowse2_render_farm "Running a GBrowse2 render farm").

If things don't seem to work as advertised, please check the Apache
server error log file, usually /var/log/apache/error_log, for clues
about where things are going wrong.

## <span id="Running_GBrowse_under_modperl" class="mw-headline">Running GBrowse under modperl</span>

<a href="http://perl.apache.org/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">ModPerl</a> is an Apache extension that embeds a Perl
interpreter in the Apache process. Unfortunately signal handling is
inconsistent among different combinations of Perl, mod_perl, and Apache,
and **mod_perl is no longer supported by GBrowse2**. Please use FastCGI
instead.

## <span id="Configuring_the_User_Account_Database" class="mw-headline">Configuring the User Account Database</span>

GBrowse offers an optional feature that allows users to register
themselves and establish password-protected accounts. When a user logs
into her account from any machine, her custom tracks and visual settings
(such as panel width) are restored. Otherwise, these settings are lost
as soon as the user moves to a different machine or web browser
software. In future versions of GBrowse, enabling this feature will
allow users to search for public shared tracks and selectively share
custom tracks with each other. The user accounts feature also allows
users to login using an
<a href="http://openid.net/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">OpenID</a>, such as one obtained from Yahoo or Flickr, or
to associate one or several OpenIDs with their account.

Once user accounts are installed, you may use a special administrator's
account to upload and manage public tracks remotely. This eliminates the
need to log into the server each time you need to create or modify a
track. This facility is described in [\#The_Admin_Interface The Admin
interface](#The_Admin_Interface_The_Admin_interface).

There are three steps to getting the user account database going: (1)
installing the required Perl modules; (2) creating and configuring the
user account database; and (3) configuring GBrowse to send outgoing
email.

- Installing the necessary Perl modules

The login module needs to process OpenID transactions. It also needs to
send outgoing email, which nowadays frequently requires authentication
between the GBrowse web server host and the mail hub. The following
additional libraries and modules are required for basic functionality:

**Digest::SHA**  
For creating and storing passwords. Available from
<a href="http://www.cpan.org" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">CPAN</a> or as Debian package or as Debian package
libdigest-sha-perl.

<!-- -->

**Crypt::SSLeay**  
For OpenID authentication. Available from
<a href="http://www.cpan.org" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">CPAN</a> or as Debian package libcrypt-ssleay-perl. This
module in turn requires the
<a href="http://www.openssl.org/" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">OpenSSL package</a>, Debian package *libssl-dev*.

<!-- -->

**Math::BigInt::Pari** or **Math::BigInt::GMP**  
These libraries speed up Net::OpenID::Consumer, and in particular reduce
the time needed to run the Net::OpenID::Consumer tests. To use the Pari
module you will first need to install libpari
(<a href="http://pari.math.u-bordeaux.fr/).To" class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://pari.math.u-bordeaux.fr/).To</a> use GMP install
libGMP (<a href="http://gmplib.org/" class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://gmplib.org/</a>). Debian users can simply install
*libmath-bigint-gmp-perl*.

<!-- -->

**Net::OpenID::Consumer**  
For OpenID authentication. Available from
<a href="http://www.cpan.org" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">CPAN</a> or as Debian package
*libnet-openid-consumer-perl*.

If your preferred mail server requires user authentication to forward
outgoing mail, then you will also need the following two modules:

**Net::SMTP::SSL**  
Encrypted connections to mail servers. Available from
<a href="http://www.cpan.org" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">CPAN</a> or as Debian package *libnet-smtp-ssl-perl*.

<!-- -->

**Authen::SASL**  
Handle the authentication between mail client and server. Available from
<a href="http://www.cpan.org" class="external text"
rel="nofollow">CPAN</a> or as Debian package *libauthen-sasl-per*l.

### <span id="Creating_and_configuring_the_user_account_database" class="mw-headline">Creating and configuring the user account database</span>

First, choose the desired Perl DBI backend for the user account
database. Currently two DBI backends are supported: mysql and SQLite.
Mysql is appropriate for an environment in which multiple load-balancing
GBrowse servers are running because the database can be hosted on a
common network-connected server. SQLite is simpler to set up, and
possibly faster.

To create and initialize a mysql login database run the script
**gbrowse_create_useraccount_db.pl** which should have been installed
when you installed GBrowse:

     gbrowse_create_useraccount_db.pl \
          -dsn DBI:mysql:gbrowse_login;user=gbrowse;password=gbrowse \
          -admin root \
          -p

**-dsn** specifies the full Perl-style path to a Mysql database named
"gbrowse_login". GBrowse will access the newly-created database using a
username of "gbrowse" and a password of "gbrowse".

**-admin** specifies the Mysql administrator's name (this user must have
the ability to add and drop databases). You may combine the admin's name
and password into a single argumenton the command line by following the
format "-admin username:password".

**-p** tells the script to prompt for the administrator's password on
standard input. This avoids having to put the password on the command
line.

To create a SQLite database you can use the same script with options
like these:

    gbrowse_create_useraccount_db.pl \
          -dsn DBI:SQLite:/var/tmp/gbrowse2/users.sqlite \
          -owner www-data:www-data

This creates a user database at /var/tmp/gbrowse2/users.sqlite. This
database has to be readable and writable by the web user and/or group,
and so we must set this ownership using the **-owner** option. If you
get a permissions error when you try to create the database, you may
need to run the script as the superuser using "sudo" or "su".

Once the database has been created, you need to tell GBrowse about it,
by setting the following options in the GBrowse.conf \[GENERAL\]
section:

    user accounts   = 1
    user_account_db = DBI:SQLite:/var/tmp/gbrowse2/users.sqlite

**user accounts = 1** activates the login system. Change
**user_account_db** to the DBI path specified when you created the
database.

### <span id="Configuring_outgoing_email" class="mw-headline">Configuring outgoing email</span>

When a user registers an account in GBrowse, the system sends a
confirmation message to the email address she provided during
registration. When she receives the message, she is prompted to click a
link to confirm her account.

To successfully send out this email message, the web server host on
which GBrowse runs needs to send a message through an email gateway. You
will need to identify the appropriate gateway to use and update
GBrowse.conf with its address.

Only SMTP gateways are supported at this time, but almost all
organizations and home computers will have access to one. Please see
your local IT group, or check your internet service provider's
documentation, to find out the hostname, port, and authentication
required by your local gateway. As a last resort, you can always create
a Google or Yahoo email account dedicated to the use of your GBrowse
instance.

Once you have the gateway information, update the **smtp_gateway**
option in GBrowse.conf. The full format is
*smtp_server:port:encryption:user:password*, but many of the fields are
optional. Here is a config that is appropriate for a simple SMTP server
that does not require authentication:

    smtp_gateway = smtp.res.oicr.on.ca

Here is a config that is appropriate for a server listening on an
unusual port (port 75 rather than the usual 25):

    smtp_gateway = smtp.res.oicr.on.ca:75

Here is a config for a server that requires SSL encryption and listens
on the standard ssl-mail port 465:

    smtp_gateway = smtp.res.oicr.on.ca:465:ssl

And here is a config for GMail's gateway, which requires SSL encryption
as well as the name and password of a user with a GMail account:

    smtp_gateway = smtp.gmail.com:465:ssl:joe.user:joespasswd

The "encryption" field is one of "plain" or "ssl", defaulting to "plain"
(no encryption). The port field defaults to 25 for plain encryption, and
465 for ssl encryption.

If the email step of the registration process does not work, check the
server error log to see if there are any messages about the mail being
rejected due to bad authentication or inadequate authorization, which
could indicate that your SMTP gateway needs SSL or user authentication
to accept mail. During debugging, it may be helpful to connect to the
user database and periodically empty the "users" table of aborted user
registrations by issuing the SQL command "delete from users".

There are several customization options in the user accounts section
that you may wish to change. These are:

**application_name**  
When the registration confirmation email arrives, it will appear to have
been sent from a user named "GBrowse". You can change this value via
this option.

**application_name_long**  
The registration confirmation also includes a longer description of the
e-mail sender. You may wish to change this as well.

**email_address**  
This value will change the reply-to address on the confirmation email.

Here is a fully worked example:

    application_name = Arabidopsis Genome Browser
    application_name_long = The Arabidopsis Information Resource
    email_address = help@arabidopsis.org

The email will now appear to come from a user named "Arabidopsis Genome
Browser" and the letter will be signed by "The Arabidopsis Information
Resource."

Note that some authenticated SMTP gateways do not allow you to
arbitrarily change the apparent sender in order to reduce spam. In this
case, the email address will always appear to come from the user whose
authentication information was provided in the smtp_gateway information.

### <span id="The_Admin_Interface" class="mw-headline">The Admin Interface</span>

GBrowse recognizes a special privileged user who can upload and
configure tracks that will be public. These tracks become part of the
standard list of tracks that everyone sees. By default this user is
known as "admin", but you can change the name by editing the value of
the "admin_account" option in GBrowse.conf.

Because it is privileged, you cannot use the login registration system
to create the account. Instead, run the script
"gbrowse_set_admin_passwd.pl" which was installed when you installed
GBrowse. It does not need any arguments. Simply run it from the command
line, and it will prompt you for a password to use for the admin
account:

    bin/gbrowse_set_admin_passwd.pl
    Not running as www-data. Trying to use sudo to remedy. You may be asked for your login password.
    New password for admin: ******
    Confirm password for admin: ******
    admin userid set to 38bc6f6c526f390c1422d1fd1476b2f7
    Admin account "admin" is now registered.

The only potentially confusing aspect of this script is that it needs to
run with the same permissions as the web server. If it detects that it
is not being run as this user, it invokes "sudo" to change the userid.
This means that you may be prompted for your **own** passwd before being
asked for the new admin password. You will know this is happening
because the initial password prompt will begin with "\[sudo\]".

Once the admin user is set up, you can log into GBrowse as "admin" using
the password you supplied. When you do so, uploading files to the
"Upload and Share Tracks" section will create public tracks that all can
see. It is suggested that you first upload a file, and then use the
inline editing interface to customize the track configuration file as
shown in the illustration below.


<a href="../File:Editing_track_config2.png" class="image"><img
src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GMOD/gmod.github.io/main/mediawiki/images/thumb/3/34/Editing_track_config2.png/250px-Editing_track_config2.png"
class="thumbimage"
srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GMOD/gmod.github.io/main/mediawiki/images/thumb/3/34/Editing_track_config2.png/375px-Editing_track_config2.png 1.5x, https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GMOD/gmod.github.io/main/mediawiki/images/thumb/3/34/Editing_track_config2.png/500px-Editing_track_config2.png 2x"
width="250" height="170" /></a>


<a href="../File:Editing_track_config2.png" class="internal"
title="Enlarge"><img
src="../../mediawiki/skins/common/images/magnify-clip.png" width="15"
height="11" /></a>



editing_track_config2.png\]
<a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GMOD/gmod.github.io/main/mediawiki/images/3/34/Editing_track_config2.png"
class="internal" title="Editing track config2.png">View at full
resolution</a>




The format of the track configuration files is identical to that
described above. The only difference is that the *database* option is
ignored, because upload database are managed internally by GBrowse. In
addition, the *remote renderer* option will not have the desired effect
unless you are using a shared mysql database backend for custom track
uploads as described in the previous sections.

You may also, if you wish, log into the server machine and edit uploaded
files directly. They are stored in a directory named "admin_uploads"
under the \$DATABASES directory (usually
/var/www/gbrowse2/databases/admin_uploads). Each uploaded file lives in
a directory named after it containing a config file, other support
files, and often a SQLite database named index.SQLite.

#### <span id="WebGBrowse" class="mw-headline">WebGBrowse</span>

[WebGBrowse](../WebGBrowse.1 "WebGBrowse") is a web-based administrative
interface for GBrowse2 written by Ram Podicheti and colleagues at
Indiana University. With it, you can create new GBrowse datasources,
configure them, and manage tracks all from a convenient web-based user
interface. You can try it out and download the source code for your own
use from
<a href="http://webgbrowse.cgb.indiana.edu/" class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://webgbrowse.cgb.indiana.edu/</a>.

## <span id="Displaying_Next_Generation_Sequencing_Data" class="mw-headline">Displaying Next Generation Sequencing Data</span>

To work with Next Generation Sequencing data in BAM or SAM format, you
will need to install the following:

- Bio::DB::Sam from CPAN
  - This requires the C Samtools library. See
    <a href="http://cpansearch.perl.org/src/LDS/Bio-SamTools-1.35/README"
    class="external free"
    rel="nofollow">http://cpansearch.perl.org/src/LDS/Bio-SamTools-1.35/README</a>
    for details.
- Bio::DB::BigFile from CPAN
  - This requires the Jim Kent source tree. See
    <a href="http://cpansearch.perl.org/src/LDS/Bio-BigFile-1.07/README"
    class="external free"
    rel="nofollow">http://cpansearch.perl.org/src/LDS/Bio-BigFile-1.07/README</a>
    for details.
- The following binaries installed in your PATH
  - bedGraphToBigWig, from the Jim Kent source tree.
  - genomeCoverageBed, from BEDTools
    <a href="http://code.google.com/p/bedtools/" class="external free"
    rel="nofollow">http://code.google.com/p/bedtools/</a>

Once these are installed, users will be able to upload and view BAM and
SAM files, as well as to link to indexed BAM files via the URL
interface. See
[GBrowse_NGS_Tutorial](../GBrowse_NGS_Tutorial "GBrowse NGS Tutorial")
for a tutorial on configuration.

## <span id="Configuring_the_Uploaded_Track_Database" class="mw-headline">Configuring the Uploaded Track Database</span>

When a user uploads or imports a custom track, GBrowse creates a
directory containing information about this upload. This directory is
stored in the GBrowse temporary path (typically
/var/tmp/gbrowse2/userdata) under a directory named after the user's
session ID, which is a long hexadecimal number. For fast indexed access
to the information in the track, GBrowse also creates a secondary
database using the BioPerl Bio::DB::SeqFeature::Store genome feature
storage system.

A variety of backends are supported, and GBrowse will automatically pick
one that your system supports based on Perl's installed DBI drivers.
GBrowse prefers the SQLite backend because it requires no additional
configuration and has excellent performance. You may wish to install
DBD::SQLite if it is not already there.

To force a particular backend, set the **userdb_adaptor** option in
GBrowse.conf's \[GENERAL\] section. Valid options are "memory",
"berkeleydb", "DBI::SQLite" and "DBI::mysql". Use the "memory" adaptor
only as a last resort, as it has poor performance relative to the
others.

### <span id="Using_the_DBI::mysql_backend" class="mw-headline">Using the DBI::mysql backend</span>

The DBI::mysql backend has excellent performance, but it requires
additional configuration to give the GBrowse server the rights to create
and destroy databases on the Mysql server.

First, choose a username and password for the GBrowse account. We will
use "gbrowse" and "secret" in this example.

Second, use the mysql client application to log into the Mysql server
using the db administrator's name and password.

Now, grant the GBrowse user the ability to create and drop databases
that begin with the string "userdata\_":

     mysql> grant create on `userdata\_%`.* to 'gbrowse'@'localhost' identified by "secret";

If you are using a Mysql server running on a different host from the web
server, replace "localhost" with the name of the web server host, or use
the wildcard character "%" to allow GBrowse to connect from any host.

Last, update GBrowse.conf with the appropriate values for
**userdb_adaptor**, **userdb_host**, **userdb_user** and
**userdb_pass**.

## <span id="Authentication_and_Authorization" class="mw-headline">Authentication and Authorization</span>

You can restrict who has access to gbrowse by IP address, host name,
domain or username and password. Restriction can apply to the datasource
as a whole, or to particular annotation tracks.

To limit access to a whole datasource, you can use Apache's standard
authentication and authorization. GBrowse uses a URL of this form to
select which datasource it is set to:

         http://your.host/cgi-bin/gb2/gbrowse/your_datasource

where "your_datasource" is the name of the currently selected database.
For example, the yeast source is
<a href="http://your.host/cgi-bin/gb2/gbrowse/yeast"
class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://your.host/cgi-bin/gb2/gbrowse/yeast</a>.

To control access to the entire database, create a \<Location\> section
in httpd.conf. The \<Location\> section should look like this:


``` de1
   <Location /cgi-bin/gb2/gbrowse/your_database>
        Order deny,allow
        deny from all
        allow from localhost .cshl.edu .ebi.ac.uk
   </Location>
```


This denies access to everybody except for "localhost" and browsers from
the domains .cshl.edu and .ebi.ac.uk. You can also limit by IP address,
by username and password or by combinations of these techniques. See
<a href="http://httpd.apache.org/docs/howto/auth.html"
class="external free"
rel="nofollow">http://httpd.apache.org/docs/howto/auth.html</a> for the
full details.

You can also limit individual tracks to certain individuals or
organizations. Unless the stated requirements are met, the track will
not appear on the main screen or any of the configuration screens. To
set this up, add a "restrict" option to the track you wish to make
off-limits:

           [PROPRIETARY]
           feature = etc
           glyph   = etc
           restrict = Order deny,allow
                      deny from all
                      allow from localhost .cshl.edu .ebi.ac.uk

The value of the restrict option is identical to the Apache
authorization directives and can include any of the directives "Order,"
"Satisfy," "deny from," "allow from," "require valid-user" or "require
user." The only difference is that the "require group" directive is not
supported, since the location of Apache's group file is not passed to
CGI scripts. Note that username/password authentication must be turned
on in httpd.conf and the user must have successfully authenticated
himself in order for the username to be available.

As with other gbrowse options, restrict can be a code subroutine. The
subroutine will be called with three arguments consisting of the host,
ip address and authenticated user. It should return a true value to
allow access to the track, or a false value to forbid it. This can be
used to implement group-based authorization or more complex schemes.

Here is an example that uses the Text::GenderFromName to allow access if
the user's name sounds female and forbids access if the name sounds
male. (It might be useful for an X-chromosome annotation site.)


``` de1
    restrict = sub {
               my ($host,$ip,$user) = @_;
               return unless defined $user;
               use Text::GenderFromName qw(gender);
               return gender($user) eq 'f';
             }
```


You should be aware that the username will only be defined if username
authentication is turned on and the user has successfully authenticated
himself against Apache's user database using the correct password. In
addition, the hostname will only be defined if HostnameLookups have been
turned on in httpd.conf. In the latter case, you can convert the IP
address into a hostname using this piece of code:

       use Socket;
       $host = gethostbyaddr(inet_aton($addr),AF_INET);

Note that this may slow down the response time of gbrowse noticeably if
you have a slow DNS name server.

Another thing to be aware of when restricting access to an entire
datasource is that that even though the datasource itself will not be
accessible to unauthorized users, the name of the datasource will still
be available from the popup "Data Source" menu. If you wish the name to
be suppressed from view, add the option **hide=1** to the datasource
configuration stanza of the GBrowse.conf file:

     [example_datasource]
     description  = Draft annotation of v. volvulus
     path          = v_volvulus_draft.conf
     hide          = 1

The **restrict** option can also be used in a \[datasource\] section of
GBrowse.conf to conditionally enable display of the source to certain IP
addresses or users. For example, to display the V. volvulus source only
to users in the .ebi.ac.uk domain or to an authenticated user named
"Admin":

     [example_datasource]
     description  = Draft annotation of v. volvulus
     path         = v_volvulus_draft.conf
     restrict = Satisfy any
                Order deny,allow
                deny from all
                allow from .ebi.ac.uk
                require user Admin

To completely disable generation of the data sources popup menu, set
**show sources=0** in the \[GENERAL\] section of GBrowse.conf.




[Categories](../Special%3ACategories "Special%3ACategories"):

- [GBrowse](../Category%3AGBrowse "Category%3AGBrowse")
- [HOWTO](../Category%3AHOWTO "Category%3AHOWTO")
- [GBrowse 2](../Category%3AGBrowse_2 "Category%3AGBrowse 2")







## Navigation menu






### 



<a href="../Main_Page"
style="background-image: url(../../images/GMOD-cogs.png);"
title="Visit the main page"></a>


### Navigation



- <span id="n-GMOD-Home">[GMOD Home](../Main_Page)</span>
- <span id="n-Software">[Software](../GMOD_Components)</span>
- <span id="n-Categories-.2F-Tags">[Categories /
  Tags](../Categories)</span>
- <span id="n-View-all-pages">[View all
  pages](../Special:AllPages)</span>




### Documentation



- <span id="n-Overview">[Overview](../Overview)</span>
- <span id="n-FAQs">[FAQs](../Category%3AFAQ)</span>
- <span id="n-HOWTOs">[HOWTOs](../Category%3AHOWTO)</span>
- <span id="n-Glossary">[Glossary](../Glossary)</span>




### Community



- <span id="n-GMOD-News">[GMOD News](../GMOD_News)</span>
- <span id="n-Training-.2F-Outreach">[Training /
  Outreach](../Training_and_Outreach)</span>
- <span id="n-Support">[Support](../Support)</span>
- <span id="n-GMOD-Promotion">[GMOD Promotion](../GMOD_Promotion)</span>
- <span id="n-Meetings">[Meetings](../Meetings)</span>
- <span id="n-Calendar">[Calendar](../Calendar)</span>




### Tools

- <span id="t-smwbrowselink"><a href="../Special%3ABrowse/GBrowse_2.0_Install_HOWTO-2FAdvanced"
  rel="smw-browse">Browse properties</a></span>



- <span id="footer-info-lastmod">Last updated at 14:44 on 10 July
  2013.</span>
<!-- - <span id="footer-info-viewcount">109,817 page views.</span> -->
- <span id="footer-info-copyright">Content is available under
  <a href="http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html" class="external"
  rel="nofollow">a GNU Free Documentation License</a> unless otherwise
  noted.</span>

<!-- -->

- <span id="footer-places-about">[About
  GMOD](../GMOD%3AAbout "GMOD%3AAbout")</span>

<!-- -->




